1. Phishing Attacks
Phishing is currently the type of password attack that’s getting the most press online—and it’s easy to see why. With 75% of organizations having experienced a phishing attack, being targeted can’t be avoided—but falling for phishing attacks, can be.
The thing about phishing is that it relies on human error to be successful. Rather than a hacker having to crack a password, users readily hand over their sensitive information on a plate. And why do they do this? Well, because they don’t know they’re handing their information over to hackers.
That’s how phishing works. A hacker will send their victim an email disguised as if from a trustworthy source—for example, a bank, network provider, or delivery service—usually asking them to perform a certain action. Let’s use PayPal as an example. A hacker might send an email disguised as if from PayPal, notifying their target that their account has been locked until they verify their identity by entering their credentials online. Once the user clicks the link to the fake PayPal site and enters their credentials on this webpage, the hacker then has their details and can log in to their target’s genuine PayPal account.
But it doesn’t stop there—if the user has reused that password across multiple accounts, the hacker will now have access to all accounts sharing that password! Which leads us on nicely to our next point.

2. Credential Stuffing Attacks
The trouble with humans is that we have notoriously bad memories. That’s why the thought of remembering dozens of unique passwords for different accounts while also changing them every three months is overwhelming.
Because of this, 68% of Americans were proven to reuse the same passwords across multiple accounts in 2021. This makes more than two-thirds of the population vulnerable to credential stuffing attacks—especially if one or more of their accounts have already been compromised.
Credential stuffing relies on this human tendency to reuse passwords. During this type of password attack, a hacker will try various combinations of stolen usernames and passwords, with the hopes of gaining access to an account where the target has reused a compromised password. Hackers can obtain stolen passwords from the dark web, or simply reuse those they’ve already stolen using other methods of credential theft. You can see if your passwords have been compromised on the dark web using this tool: https://haveibeenpwned.com/.

3. Brute Force Attacks
Brute force attacks are among the most common and easiest methods for hackers to gain access to accounts—which is why they’re so widespread. In fact, 80% of hacking breaches are estimated to involve these types of password attacks.
To carry out a brute force attack, a hacker will use a computer program to try all possible letter, number, and symbol sequences character-by-character, until hitting the correct combination, so they can gain access to a user’s account.
This is done systematically, often starting with the most common passwords—which is why “123456” and “password” take less than a second to crack. The program is usually automated, can take password requirements into account—such as a minimum character limit and inclusion of a number or symbol—and can bypass limits on the number of attempts that can be tried before the account is locked.

4. Dictionary Attacks
While dictionary attacks are a type of brute force attack, there is a key difference between the two. Whereas traditional brute force attacks attempt to crack a password character-by-character, a dictionary attack will make its way through a list of common words and phrases.
Dictionary attacks tend to rely on variations of commonly used words, but more advanced attacks use details that are personalized to specific users—and these details are easy to find online. In fact, it can take seconds to discover an employee’s pet’s name from their Instagram account, or their favorite band from their Spotify profile. Unsurprisingly, “Justin” was the 136th most commonly used password in 2021 according to recent research by NordPass. So, yes, Justin Bieber can not only be the reason you might turn down the radio, but also the reason your organization experiences a cyberattack!

5. Password Spraying Attacks
Similar to the dictionary attack, password spraying is a type of brute force attack that works by attempting to access accounts using commonly used passwords. What makes a password spraying attack different—as the word “spraying” might suggest— is that it can target thousands or even millions of different users at once, rather than just one account.
Distributing login attempts across multiple users and organizations rather than one single user also lessens the risk of the hacker being caught by account lockout policies triggered by repeated failed login attempts.
Password spraying attacks commonly target single sign-on and cloud-based platforms and can prove particularly dangerous for these.

6. Keylogger Attacks
Keystroke loggers—or, keyloggers—are particularly dangerous, because even the strongest passwords can’t protect you from them. Imagine someone watching you over your shoulder as you type in a password—no matter how strong that password is, if they’ve seen you type it in, then they know it.
That’s how keyloggers work—not by cracking passwords, but by spying on their victim and recording their passwords as they type them in. But not just passwords—keyloggers record everything you type. This means hackers don’t have to guess usernames because they’ve already recorded that information, as well as credit card details, answers to security questions, and sensitive information such as social security numbers.
A common type of spyware, keyloggers work by infecting a victim’s device with malware. While physical device keyloggers do exist, software keyloggers are far more common. This means that to infect a victim’s device they need to make it into the system—usually via a phishing attack, drive-by download, or trojan. Once keyloggers have infected a system, they’re almost impossible to detect, which is why, particularly in this case, prevention is the best defense.

7. Man-In-The-Middle Attacks
Man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks are almost self-explanatory—they involve a type of interception while data is in transit. A hacker will sit between two different destinations and relay data between the two. Think of it this way: three people are sat side by side and, for the two on the outside to communicate back and forth, they must pass messages through the person in the middle. Except during MitM attacks, the victims have no idea that the person in the middle is even there.
To carry out a MitM password attack, a hacker will likely act as a proxy to disguise the fact that the data is being intercepted. To use our PayPal example from earlier, the hacker might set up a fake PayPal login page and encourag
